Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today
we are going to be talking
about a man called Thomas Cook.
Now, the name Thomas Cook might ring a
bell, it might sound familiar to you.
Perhaps you’ve seen Thomas Cook
aeroplanes, cruises, or perhaps you’ve
even been on a Thomas Cook holiday.
But we are going to be talking
about the man behind this travel
company, a man who, by many people’s
standards, invented modern tourism.
It’s a fascinating story about a
man with a mission, the industrial
revolution, and the opening up of the
UK, Europe, and the wider world to an
entirely new generation of tourists.
We’ve got a lot to get through,
so let’s get right into it.
If you had heard of Thomas Cook, I
wonder what thought first sprung to mind.
Perhaps it’s seeing signs
for Thomas Cook in airports.
If you live in a place where there
are lots of tourists, like the south
coast of Spain, for example, perhaps
it’s seeing Thomas Cook buses, or
seeing huge groups of British tourists
who have spent too much time in
the sun and drunk too many beers.
The name Thomas Cook is now synonymous
with package holidays, where you can
buy a flight, a hotel, and often all
the food and alcoholic drinks you can
stomach, all for one fixed, low price.
And on the subject of alcohol, as you may
know, British holidaymakers have somewhat
of a bad reputation for drinking a lot.
Indeed, Thomas Cook had to issue
a warning in 2022 to British
holidaymakers to Spain that their
supposed “unlimited drinks” were in
fact going to be limited to six per day.
Now, you might think that six alcoholic
drinks a day sounds like a serious
amount, and nobody should ever reach
that number, but let me tell you that
this was enough of a surprise to British
holidaymakers that it made headline news.
And on the subject of surprises, let
me tell you that Thomas Cook the man,
the original founder of the company,
would be turning in his grave, he
would be very upset, if he found
out that his name was being used to
advertise and promote drinking alcohol.
Why?
Well, because his eponymous, company,
Thomas Cook, was founded as a way to
encourage people to stop drinking.
He was a man on a mission,
and that mission was simple:
stop people getting drunk.
To understand why this was, to understand
why this mission led him to founding
this company, we must do three things:
first, we must spend some time reflecting
on what life was like in 19th century
Britain for working people, then
briefly talk about the technological
developments of the Industrial Revolution,
and then look at Thomas Cook the man.
So, what was life like
in 19th century Britain?
Well, for the vast majority of
the population, it was pretty
grim, it wasn't much fun.
There had been a mass migration of
people from the countryside to the
industrial cities, where people
lived together in cramped housing,
working 12 hour days and with one
day off a week if they were lucky.
There simply wasn’t much free time,
and the free time there was was
typically spent drinking alcohol.
Work in the factories from dawn
until dusk, Monday to Saturday,
then go to the pub on a Saturday
night to blow your wages, to spend
your money on beer and whisky.
This was how most people
working in mid-19th century
Britain lived their lives.
Now, if you’re thinking, “don’t
people in Britain still do this?”,
sure, you'd be partly right, but it
was so much more widespread during
the Victorian Era than it is today.
Drunkenness was a huge issue, and with
it violence, which was often directed
at poor men’s wives as they returned
home after a heavy night of drinking.
So, that’s our first factor, a working
population with little to no “free
time”, and one that used alcohol as its
primary method of relaxation and leisure.
Secondly, we must talk about
the technological developments
of the Industrial Revolution.
And the most important factor
here was the invention of the
steam train and the railways.
The world’s first railway dates back
to 1825, when a man called George
Stephenson connected two towns in
the northeast of England by railway.
Within 25 years, there was
10,000 kilometres of railway
throughout the country, and
most major towns were connected.
Importantly, it was cheap,
it was relatively affordable.
Why was this important?
Well, it meant that, for the first time
in history, it was comparatively easy,
affordable and fast to travel from one
place to another, and travel, after
all, is what tourism is all about.
And this brings us to the man we’re
talking about today, Thomas Cook.
He was born in 1808 in Melbourne.
No, not Melbourne, Australia;
Melbourne, Derbyshire, a market
town in the middle of England.
He grew up towards the end of
the Industrial Revolution, and
as a consequence he saw its
effect on the people around him.
And what did he see?
Well, what we talked
about a few minutes ago.
Men and women working long hours in
dangerous and unfulfilling work, and
using alcohol as a way of escape.
Cook left school aged only ten years old,
and he immediately got his first job,
working as a gardener for a penny a day,
before becoming an apprentice woodworker,
someone who made wooden furniture.
His upbringing was a highly religious one;
his parents were both devout Baptists,
and Cook would follow in their footsteps.
He was a preacher in his teenage years,
and at the age of twenty he became
a full-on missionary, distributing
information about the Baptist
church and trying to convert people.
A couple of years later, in 1830,
at the age of 22, he discovered
the Temperance movement, which was
a social movement that  campaigned
against alcohol and drunkenness.
He became an advocate of this
movement, preaching to anyone who would
listen about the dangers of alcohol.
But clearly, there was a limited
impact any one man could have.
He might persuade a few people to stop
drinking, doing the Lord’s work as he
believed it was, but this was a problem
that affected the entire country.
So, what could be done about it?
Well, Thomas Cook had an idea.
It all started in 1841, when he needed
to go to a meeting of Temperance
campaigners twenty five kilometres away.
His plan was to walk there, but he
had an idea, and I’m quoting directly:
“A thought flashed through my brain – what
a glorious thing it would be if the
newly developed powers of railways and
locomotion could be made subservient
to the promotion of temperance”
Or to translate this into plain English,
what if we could use trains to encourage
people to stop drinking alcohol?
And so his first trip, or tour, was
taking a group of 500 Temperance
campaigners on a short railway journey.
Easy enough, you might think.
But Cook sensed the potential.
It was all well and good taking
people to and from Temperance
movements, but what if he could
provide an alternative to drinking?
What if he could give working people a
way to experience something new, another
leisure activity, and most importantly,
one that didn’t require alcohol?
It took several years, and he first
focussed his efforts on transporting
groups of people to and from Temperance
movements across the north of England.
But clearly, the seed was planted,
he had the idea of how to turn
this into something bigger.
He got to work, and by 1845 he
had arranged his first package
tour, taking a group of 350 people
on a railway tour to Scotland.
Now, this might sound like nothing
particularly special to you or me, but
at the time it really was revolutionary.
Tourism as we know it
now simply didn’t exist.
Sure, this wasn’t the first time
in history that people travelled
to experience something new.
Even going back to the ancient Egyptians
there are records of pharaohs going to
visit the pyramids or other famous sites.
The Greeks went to consult the Oracle
or watch sporting events, and even
moving into the 17th century in
Britain there was this idea of The
Grand Tour, which you can hear about
in episode number 176 by the way.
And, of course, the history of people
travelling for religious reasons,
for pilgrimage, is as old as time.
But these types of trips would take a
long time, because you’d have to go by
carriage, boat, horse, or even by foot,
and in the case of the non-religious
trips, they were restricted to the
wealthiest in society, people who
could afford to simply not work for
months or years at a time and to
take these vastly expensive trips.
Cook’s genius, or at least invention,
was to open up the ability of
experiencing a new place to an entirely
new section of society: everyone else.
Initially, the trips were within
the UK, with his most popular route
being the tours north, to Scotland.
Again, to reiterate, although now you
can get from Manchester to Glasgow on a
train in just over three hours, before
Thomas Cook's first excursions, this
simply wasn’t something that people did,
nor something they had any reason to do.
As a result, the arrival of Thomas
Cook’s groups was quite the spectacle.
When the trains first arrived in Glasgow
station guns were fired, a band was
waiting to play a celebratory song,
and speeches of praise were read out.
It really was quite something.
Thomas Cook was doing exactly as he had
hoped - he was providing an alcohol-free
leisure alternative, he was giving
people the chance to see the world, or
at least “the country”, without beer
goggles, without a drop of alcohol.
And his work was not going unnoticed.
He was asked to help transport
workers from the north of England
south, to London, for the 1851 Great
Exhibition, which you can also learn
about in episode number 59 by the way.
He accepted, he did it, and it’s
believed that he successfully
transported 150,000 people.
No mean feat, especially as nobody had
ever done anything like this before.
Up until then, he had only arranged
domestic travel, trips within Britain.
There was the rest of the world
to see, but one step at a time.
In the summer of 1855 he opened his
first European route, the so-called
“grand circular”, where people would
visit Brussels, Cologne, the Rhine,
Heidelberg, Baden-Baden, Strasbourg
and Paris, where travellers would go
to the 1855 Paris Great Exhibition,
before returning to Britain.
Again, you can do this all on
your own relatively easy now,
but imagine 170 years ago?
Not only do you have greater language
barriers, but how do you manage
the different currencies, where
to stay, where to eat, and so on?
In fact, Cook had initially planned to
simply sell the travel ticket, but he
had so many people asking him to organise
all of the accommodation and food that
he agreed, providing everything for five
pounds, today’s equivalent of around €500.
This was, perhaps, the first
“all inclusive package holiday”.
Actually delivering this was
complicated, because he had to arrange
deals with hotels, and restaurants,
manage different currencies and so on.
It was very tricky, but he managed
it thanks to two innovations.
Firstly, something called the
hotel coupon, which travellers
could use to pay for food and
rooms at various partner hotels.
And then a few years later something
called the circular note, which was
a piece of paper that travellers
could exchange for local currency.
A bit like a traveller’s cheque.
By now, Thomas Cook was the
biggest tour operator not just in
Britain or Europe, but the world.
I mean, there wasn’t much competition,
but this was a man who pioneered
the entire concept of mass tourism.
And after his European success, the
next target was indeed, the world.
In 1865 it was America, in 1869 he sold
a package tour up the River Nile, and
in 1873 he completed his own world tour,
a 222-day mammoth trip going west from
London to the United States, across North
America, across the Pacific to Japan, then
working his way through China, India, up
through the Suez Canal and back to London.
And soon enough this was a tour
he also offered to his customers,
costing 200 guineas, which is
today’s equivalent of around €20,000.
Sure, not affordable to all, but a
remarkable achievement that this was
even something that he was able to offer.
By this time, however, he was growing old,
and the day-to-day running of the business
was managed by his son, John Cook.
He died in 1892 at the ripe old
age of 83, which was pretty good
going as British life expectancy
at the time was a measly 47 years.
And in terms of the legacy he left, well
clearly there is the company named after
him, which has gone through various
booms and busts, and is now only a travel
agency, after going bankrupt in 2019.
But what he really left behind is
something more than the Thomas Cook name.
It’s the invention of mass tourism,
it’s the idea that there is value
in visiting new places, having new
experiences, and seeing something new.
Sure, seeing new places didn’t start
with Thomas Cook, and the tourism
industry would have certainly
boomed without Thomas Cook.
And his motivations for getting started
might not have been anything to do
with tourism; they might have been
religious, in a bid to rid the country
of the scourge of alcohol abuse, and
as anyone who has been on a Thomas Cook
holiday will know, Thomas Cook package
holidays are certainly not alcohol free.
So he might have failed if judged
by his own “Temperance” standards.
But in terms of increasing the
accessibility of tourism, his
achievements were seismic; he opened
people’s eyes to the wonder of tourism,
and crucially, made it available and
accessible to people who had never had
the opportunity to experience it before.
So next time you go on holiday, perhaps
you’ll spare a thought for this pioneer,
the man who can quite rightly be
called The Father of Modern Tourism.
OK then, that is it for today's
episode this brief look into the
life and times of Thomas Cook
and The Birth of Modern Tourism.
I hope it's been an interesting one,
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
Did you know about Thomas Cook before?
If you’re from a part of the world
with lots of British tourists,
what are your first thoughts when
you hear the name “Thomas Cook”?
I imagine they weren’t “promoter
of an alcohol-free lifestyle”.
And what do you think
about modern mass tourism?
What do you think Thomas Cook would
say if he could see the impact
of the tourism industry today?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.